QPACK security considerations (#3575)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-qpack.md

typically includes the Cookie header field (a potentially highly valued target
for this sort of attack), and web sites can easily force an image to be loaded,
thereby refreshing the entry in the dynamic table.

This response might be made inversely proportional to the length of the header
field value. Disabling access to the dynamic table for a header field might
occur for shorter values more quickly or with higher probability than for longer
values.

## Never Indexed Literals

Implementations can also choose to protect sensitive header fields by not
compressing them and instead encoding their value as literals.

Refusing to insert a header field into the dynamic table is only
effective if doing so is avoided on all hops. The never indexed literal bit (see
{{literal-name-reference}}) can be used to signal to intermediaries that a
particular value was intentionally sent as a literal.

An intermediary MUST NOT re-encode a value that uses a literal representation
with the 'N' bit set with another representation that would index it. If QPACK
is used for re-encoding, a literal representation with the 'N' bit set MUST be

> used.  If HPACK (see Section 6.2.3 of [RFC7541]) is used for re-encoding, the
> never indexed literal representation MUST be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used.  If HPACK is used for re-encoding, the never indexed literal
representation (see Section 6.2.3 of [RFC7541]) MUST be used.
```

> The choice to use a never indexed literal representation for a header field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The choice to mark that a header field should never be indexed
```

considered to be highly valuable or sensitive to recovery, such as the Cookie or
Authorization header fields.

On the contrary, an encoder might prefer indexing values for header fields that
have little or no value if they were exposed. For instance, a User-Agent header
field does not commonly vary between requests and is sent to any server. In that
case, confirmation that a particular User-Agent value has been used provides
little value.

Note that these criteria for deciding to use a never indexed literal
representation will evolve over time as new attacks are discovered.

## Static Huffman Encoding

There is no currently known attack against a static Huffman encoding. A study
has shown that using a static Huffman encoding table created an information
leakage, however this same study concluded that an attacker could not take
advantage of this information leakage to recover any meaningful amount of
information (see [PETAL]).

## Memory Consumption

An attacker can try to cause an endpoint to exhaust its memory. QPACK is
designed to limit both the peak and stable amounts of memory allocated by an
endpoint.

> The amount of memory used by the compressor is limited by the protocol using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The amount of memory used by the encoder is limited by the protocol using
```

QPACK through the definition of the maximum size of the dynamic table, and the
maximum number of blocking streams. In HTTP/3, these values are controlled by

> the decoder through the setting parameter SETTINGS_QPACK_MAX_TABLE_CAPACITY and
> SETTINGS_QPACK_BLOCKED_STREAMS, respectively (see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the decoder through the settings parameters SETTINGS_QPACK_MAX_TABLE_CAPACITY
and SETTINGS_QPACK_BLOCKED_STREAMS, respectively (see
```

{{maximum-dynamic-table-capacity}} and {{blocked-streams}}). The limit on the
size of the dynamic table takes into account both the size of the data stored in

> the dynamic table, plus a small allowance for overhead.  The limit on the number

Reviewer 2: "both" does not flow well with "plus".  Either s/", plus"/" and"/, or remove "both".

the decoder uses to track each blocked stream.

A decoder can limit the amount of state memory used for the dynamic table by
setting an appropriate value for the maximum size of the dynamic table. In
HTTP/3, this is realized by setting an appropriate value for the
SETTINGS_QPACK_MAX_TABLE_CAPACITY parameter. An encoder can limit the amount of
state memory it uses by signaling a lower dynamic table size than the decoder
allows (see {{eviction}}).

A decoder can limit the amount of state memory used for blocked streams by
setting an appropriate value for the maximum number of blocked streams.  In
HTTP/3, this is realized by setting an appropriate value for the
QPACK_BLOCKED_STREAMS parameter.  An encoder can limit the amount of state
memory by only using as many blocked streams as it wishes to support; no
signaling to the decoder is requred.

The amount of temporary memory consumed by an encoder or decoder can be limited
by processing header fields sequentially. A decoder implementation does not need
to retain a complete list of header fields while decoding a header block. An
encoder implementation does not need to retain a complete list of header fields

> if while encoding a header block if it is using a single-pass encoder.  Note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while encoding a header block if it is using a single-pass algorithm.  Note
```

   secrets that are compressed into a shared compression context.
 * Denial of service resulting from exhausting processing or memory capacity at
   a decoder.

## Probing Dynamic Table State

QPACK reduces the length of header field encodings by exploiting the redundancy
inherent in protocols like HTTP. The ultimate goal of this is to reduce the
amount of data that is required to send HTTP requests or responses.

The compression context used to encode header fields can be probed by an
attacker who can both define header fields to be encoded and transmitted and
observe the length of those fields once they are encoded. When an attacker can
do both, they can adaptively modify requests in order to confirm guesses about
the dynamic table state. If a guess is compressed into a shorter length, the
attacker can observe the encoded length and infer that the guess was correct.

This is possible even over the Transport Layer Security Protocol (TLS, see
{{?RFC5246}}), because while TLS provides confidentiality protection for
content, it only provides a limited amount of protection for the length of that
content.

Note:

> Padding schemes only provide limited protection against an attacker with these

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: Padding schemes only provide limited protection against an attacker with these
```

the length associated with a given guess. Padding schemes also work directly
against compression by increasing the number of bits that are transmitted.

Attacks like CRIME [CRIME] demonstrated the existence of these general attacker
capabilities. The specific attack exploited the fact that DEFLATE {{?RFC1951}}
removes redundancy based on prefix matching. This permitted the attacker to
confirm guesses a character at a time, reducing an exponential-time attack into
a linear-time attack.

## Applicability to QPACK and HTTP

QPACK mitigates but does not completely prevent attacks modeled on CRIME [CRIME]
by forcing a guess to match an entire header field value, rather than individual
characters. An attacker can only learn whether a guess is correct or not, so is
reduced to a brute force guess for the header field values.

The viability of recovering specific header field values therefore depends on
the entropy of values. As a result, values with high entropy are unlikely to be
recovered successfully. However, values with low entropy remain vulnerable.

Attacks of this nature are possible any time that two mutually distrustful

> entities control requests or responses that are placed onto a single HTTP/2

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
entities control requests or responses that are placed onto a single HTTP/3
```

intermediary either:

 * sends requests from multiple clients on a single connection toward an origin
   server, or

 * takes responses from multiple origin servers and places them on a shared
   connection toward a client.

Web browsers also need to assume that requests made on the same connection by
different web origins {{?RFC6454}} are made by mutually distrustful entities.

## Mitigation

Users of HTTP that require confidentiality for header fields can use values with
entropy sufficient to make guessing infeasible. However, this is impractical as
a general solution because it forces all users of HTTP to take steps to mitigate
attacks. It would impose new constraints on how HTTP is used.

Rather than impose constraints on users of HTTP, an implementation of QPACK can
instead constrain how compression is applied in order to limit the potential for
dynamic table probing.

An ideal solution segregates access to the dynamic table based on the entity
that is constructing header fields. Header field values that are added to the
table are attributed to an entity, and only the entity that created a particular
value can extract that value.

> To improve compression performance of tqhis option, certain entries might be tagged as being public. For example, a web browser might make the values of the Accept-Encoding header field available in all requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To improve compression performance of this option, certain entries might be
tagged as being public. For example, a web browser might make the values of the
Accept-Encoding header field available in all requests.
```

An encoder without good knowledge of the provenance of header fields might
instead introduce a penalty for a header field with many different values, such

> that a large number of attempts to guess a header field value results in the
> header field no more being compared to the dynamic table entries in future
> messages, effectively preventing further guesses.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that a large number of attempts to guess a header field value results in the
header field not being compared to the dynamic table entries in future
messages, effectively preventing further guesses.
```

I had a little trouble with "no more".

Note:

> Simply removing entries corresponding to the header field from the dynamic table

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: Simply removing entries corresponding to the header field from the dynamic table
```

can be ineffectual if the attacker has a reliable way of causing values to be
reinstalled. For example, a request to load an image in a web browser typically
includes the Cookie header field (a potentially highly valued target for this
sort of attack), and web sites can easily force an image to be loaded, thereby
refreshing the entry in the dynamic table.

This response might be made inversely proportional to the length of the header

> field value. Marking a header field as not using the dynamic table any more
> might occur for shorter values more quickly or with higher probability than for
> longer values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
field value. Disabling access to the dynamic table for a header field might
occur for shorter values more quickly or with higher probability than for longer
values.
```

is used for re-encoding, a literal representation with the 'N' bit set MUST be
used.  If HPACK (see Section 6.2.3 of [RFC7541]) is used for re-encoding, the
never indexed literal representation MUST be used.

The choice to use a never indexed literal representation for a header field
depends on several factors. Since QPACK doesn't protect against guessing an
entire header field value, short or low-entropy values are more readily
recovered by an adversary. Therefore, an encoder might choose not to index
values with low entropy.

An encoder might also choose not to index values for header fields that are
considered to be highly valuable or sensitive to recovery, such as the Cookie or
Authorization header fields.

On the contrary, an encoder might prefer indexing values for header fields that
have little or no value if they were exposed. For instance, a User-Agent header
field does not commonly vary between requests and is sent to any server. In that
case, confirmation that a particular User-Agent value has been used provides
little value.

Note that these criteria for deciding to use a never indexed literal
representation will evolve over time as new attacks are discovered.

> ##. Static Huffman Encoding

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Static Huffman Encoding
```

There is no currently known attack against a static Huffman encoding. A study
has shown that using a static Huffman encoding table created an information
leakage, however this same study concluded that an attacker could not take
advantage of this information leakage to recover any meaningful amount of

> information (see [PETAL]).

Reviewer 3: Want to point out that QPACK uses the same Huffman table as HPACK?

Author: It's mentioned in the string literal section: 

> When Huffman encoding is enabled, the Huffman
table from Appendix B of [RFC7541] is used without modification.

## Memory Consumption

An attacker can try to cause an endpoint to exhaust its memory. QPACK is

> designed to limit both the peak and state amounts of memory allocated by an
> endpoint.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
designed to limit both the peak and stable amounts of memory allocated by an
endpoint.
```

Author: This error is in the HPACK RFC.  Is it worth an errata?

Reviewer 3: I'll let you manage that :)  You can be the author of an RFC erratum.  The glory!

The amount of memory used by the compressor is limited by the protocol using
QPACK through the definition of the maximum size of the dynamic table, and the
maximum number of blocking streams. In HTTP/3, these values are controlled by
the decoder through the setting parameter QPACK_MAX_TABLE_CAPACITY and

> QPACK_BLOCKED_STREAMS, respectively (see Section

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
QPACK_BLOCKED_STREAMS, respectively (see
```

{{maximum-dynamic-table-capacity}} and {{blocked-streams}}). The limit on the
size of the dynamic table takes into account both the size of the data stored in
the dynamic table, plus a small allowance for overhead.  The limit on the number
of blocked streams is only a proxy for the maximum amount of memory required by
the decoder.  The actual maximum amount of memory will depend on how much memory
the decoder uses to track each blocked stream.

A decoder can limit the amount of state memory used for the dynamic table by
setting an appropriate value for the maximum size of the dynamic table. In
HTTP/3, this is realized by setting an appropriate value for the

> QPACK_MAX_TABLE_CAPACITY parameter. An encoder can limit the amount of state

Reviewer 4: nit: the doc is inconsistent about QPACK_MAX_TABLE_CAPACITY  vs SETTINGS_QPACK_MAX_TABLE_CAPACITY. I don't know what the answer is

Author: The text seems to consistently use SETTINGS_ variants, but the table omits it.  I'll fix these to match the text, but SETTINGS_ seems redundant in the table.  I'll resolve the inconsistency in another PR.

Reviewer 4: wfm

Reviewer: It's an (unstated) norm to omit SETTINGS_ in cases where it's already blatantly obvious that we're discussing a setting.  You'll find similar variance in 7540, 7541, and HTTP/3.

> memory it uses by signaling lower dynamic table size than the decoder allows

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
memory it uses by signaling a lower dynamic table size than the decoder allows
```

> (see {{eviction}}).  A decoder can limit the amount of state memory used for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(see {{eviction}}).

A decoder can limit the amount of state memory used for
```

blocked streams by setting an appropriate value for the maximum number of
blocked streams.  In HTTP/3, this is realized by setting an appropriate value

> for the QPACK_BLOCKED_STREAMS parameter.  An encoder can limit the amount of

Reviewer 4: nit: QPACK_BLOCKED_STREAMS  vs. SETTINGS_QPACK_BLOCKED_STREAMS

open new streams, reading only from the encoder stream, or closing the
connection.

## Implementation Limits

An implementation of QPACK needs to ensure that large values for integers, long
encoding for integers, or long string literals do not create security
weaknesses.

An implementation has to set a limit for the values it accepts for integers, as
well as for the encoded length (see {{prefixed-integers}}). In the same way, it
has to set a limit to the length it accepts for string literals (see

> {{string-literals}}).

Reviewer: I believe we have a minimum size which MUST be supported; should that be mentioned here?

Author: @MikeBishop : I can't quite figure an elegant way to mention the minimum here.  It is already mentioned in the referenced section.
